Good afternoon.
Welcome to session 303.
So on Monday you saw intro to Xcode.
Yesterday you saw a little
bit more detail about it,
and today we're going to
get into a lot more detail.
So I hope you're ready.
So I'm Anders Bertelrud,
and I'd like to talk about
some of the details of Xcode.
What we're going to talk about today,
some of the things we'll
cover are moving to Xcode.
Some of you may have source code.
Some of you may have old
project builder projects.
You may have code warrior projects.
You may want to move that into Xcode.
We're going to talk about
optimizing build performance.
As you know, the speed is a big theme
of the Xcode discussion,
Xcode talks in this conference,
and we're going to be
going into some of that.
We're going to talk about Xcode support
for building for multiple OS versions
from one and the same install.
And also get into some issues
of workflow and automation.
We have several features
for accessing documentation,
for doing source code management,
for automating your
workflow in many ways.
And the common theme among
all of these things is time,
right?
This is all to save you time so that you
can focus on your app and fixing your
bugs and then shipping your product.
So moving into Xcode,
there are several ways.
And it's easy to get started.
Many of you have probably already
installed the developer preview for
Panther and maybe played with Xcode,
maybe installed it on Jaguar.
There are many migration paths
if you already have code.
One of them is to create a new
project using the new project
wizard of the appropriate type,
application, framework,
whatever your product is,
and then just add the source code
that you have to the project.
Another way is to open an
old Project Builder project.
Xcode can seamlessly open Project Builder
projects and build your targets,
whatever you had in the
Project Builder project.
Of course,
you can't make modifications that
rely on Xcode-only features and
then go back to Project Builder,
but you can upgrade.
Also, we have a Code Warrior importer.
Project Builder had this as well,
but in Xcode it's been improved a lot.
So we can bring in your source files,
we convert your targets,
and set a lot of the
compiler options as well.
And finally,
a fourth way is if you have a make file,
you can actually wrap an
Xcode project around that.
You just set up a target
to invoke your make file,
and you can still take
advantage of the editor,
and you can take advantage of
a lot of the features in Xcode,
but you would let your make file
or ant or jam or whatever you're
using actually do the build.
So another important point is
that if you bring in source code,
let's say you bring in an
old project builder project,
you can actually convert
each target individually.
And we'll see how to do that,
but you can leave the targets that
work best as jam targets for now.
You can take one target after
another and convert them,
and then gradually start taking
advantage of Xcode's features.
And an important point is that
some of the features we're showing,
such as zero-link and fix and continue,
are really only available
for Xcode targets.
We really rely on this new native
internal build system to deal with this.
So you need to upgrade your targets,
convert your targets to
take advantage of that.
And if you create a new project
or if you start with the samples,
the new project templates are
native targets by default.
So let's talk a little bit about some
of the target types that Xcode supports.
So first of all of course the native
Xcode targets we talked about.
We support applications, frameworks,
libraries, plugins and the developer
preview and we'll be extending
this to all the different kinds
of things you want to build,
the kernel extensions, etc.
The project builder targets,
you would still leave it as a project
builder target if it's one of the
few things we don't support yet,
which are the kernel extensions,
some of the Java types and of
course you could leave your
applications and frameworks as the
old project builder targets as well,
but then you wouldn't take
advantage of the new features,
so you'd want to upgrade.
And it's important to note we actually
support external targets as well.
So you could have any external
build system you want.
In fact, it might not even be
a build system at all.
Maybe it's just a shell script you
want to invoke as part of your build.
And it fits seamlessly into Xcode
so you can have a native application
target that depends on some
custom shell script that you have.
Another important aspect of an Xcode
project are the build settings.
So the targets define
what you want to build.
And the settings are the little
knobs and switches on that.
It defines how you want it built.
So they control the inner
workings of a build.
Do you want debug symbols or not?
Do you want optimization or not?
Where do you want the output file to go?
That kind of thing.
They're usually set on
a particular target.
You've probably seen this in
some of the earlier demos.
We're going to get into more detail
about that in a demo in this session.
And you can also, though,
set them on a build style,
what we call a build style.
So you can, for example,
set up a build style for debug
and another one for release.
You only need to have a single
target for whatever you're building,
say it's an application.
But you can apply the different
styles to build different variations.
So the styles encode the things
that are different between
a debug and a release build.
such as optimization level,
debug symbols, those kinds of things.
And the settings in the build styles
do override the ones at a lower level.
We'll see a diagram here
of how this fits together.
But the basic point is,
if you have a build style that
says it turns on optimization,
then that's going to override
what your target says.
They're also passed in the
environment for external shell
scripts and for external tools.
And this means that you can set
options in your project and have
those be passed down to whatever build
system or tool that you're using,
whether it's Make,
whether it's a custom Perl script,
things like that.
So how do these fit together?
Well, as I mentioned,
there's an ordering of them.
And this is just kind of give you
a flavor for some of the depth
here of what you can set up.
The environment variables,
such as path and user and those
kinds of Unix-y things are
available at the lowest level,
just like for Make.
Above that, there are built-in settings.
These are the defaults,
things like where the default system
locations for where frameworks go,
the default optimization
level for the compiler,
that kind of thing.
The target settings are above that.
This is what you see in the inspector,
as we'll see in a demo in a little bit.
And the build styles override that.
So this is where you would say,
turn on or off debug symbols
for a particular build.
The command line settings go above this.
These are not used in the IDE,
but as you may know,
and as we'll see later,
there is an external command line
tool that lets you build Xcode
projects as part of a nightly build
or as part of an automated process.
So if you pass anything
on the command line,
just like with Make,
it will override whatever
your project said.
So build styles, what are they used for?
Well, it's important to note that they
dynamically override the target settings.
They don't actually go
and modify the target.
So this is something that
you pick in a pop-up menu,
or you can choose it as
the active build style.
And it's just to avoid
having to duplicate targets,
because then you get into a
situation where when you add a file,
you're going to have to remember to add
it to both your debug and release target,
et cetera.
Some examples of this
are the obvious ones,
turn debug symbols on or off.
But also, you may want to enable
or disable zero link.
Zero link is a feature that
saves you a lot of time,
but it also defers some potential
link errors to the actual runtime.
So if you know zero link works,
it actually works by doing the linking
as you load in each object file.
You actually run the object files.
And when that happens,
if you have an undefined symbol,
you may not find out until later.
So you may want to turn that
off just to validate a build,
and then turn it back on to
get the speed benefit again.
Other things you can do are to enable
or disable alternate algorithms.
Or if you have a demo
version of your app,
you may want to build a demo
version with a save disabled,
and then you build the full
version also without having
to have two separate targets.
One of the new features in Xcode
compared to the older IDs that
Apple has had are to user configurable
build rules in a graphical way.
So you can actually define how the
build system maps particular file types
to compilers in a very detailed way.
And the way this works is
that there is a list of rules,
as we'll see in a little bit later.
And the first one that matches
is the one that gets applied.
So you can define both specific
and general rules and have
the specific ones first,
and then in that way you can
control very fine grain level how
your source files get processed.
In each rule can match
two different things.
It can either be a
category of file types.
Xcode has a built-in notion
of various file types,
Java source files, C++ files, res files,
nib files, let's say.
But you can also match any
particular shell pattern,
star.hc in this case matches
anything with an extension of h or c.
You can enter anything you want there.
And in Xcode, you also use the rules to
select the compiler version.
So it's very easy to just go in and
find the entries for the C files.
You can pick between GCC 3.3 or GCC 3.1,
let's say.
So now you've moved
your project into Xcode,
whether it's from project builder or by
adding sources that you had separately.
Let's talk a little bit about
optimizing the build performance.
Now, Xcode does have a fast,
powerful build system,
and it provides a lot of the
speed benefits automatically.
So there's no dependency
on external builds.
We don't generate some text
file that then has to get
parsed by an external tool.
Instead, Xcode just keeps track of the
text changes that you're making
to your source code or whether
you add files to your project,
and it automatically knows
what you need to rebuild.
So by the time you go to
actually start a build,
it's already done a lot of the work.
It's tightly integrated
with the user interface,
so you see check marks for
files that are out of date,
et cetera.
However, there are still opportunities
for you to tune your project.
Xcode will automatically do things
like predictive compilation,
but you can also set up a precompiled
prefix header for your project
that can save a lot of time.
That's something that Xcode doesn't
really do for you because it depends
on how your sources are laid out.
You'll want to define that yourself.
You can also turn on parallel
and distributed builds.
Parallel builds are on by default,
but distributed builds,
you can access that in an easy way,
but you need to enable that
because we don't want to start
sending your source code everywhere
just without you knowing it.
Zero link is something that
is also enabled by default.
Of course,
you don't want that on for deployment,
so there's fine-grained
control over that,
and the same for fix and continue.
So a word about precompiled headers.
As you may have heard in previous talks,
GCC 3.3 has a new precompiled
header mechanism called PCH.
And this is a lot better than
the older ones because it
supports C++ first and foremost,
and it's also better implementation.
These are easy to set up using
Xcode's target inspector.
What you do is you define a
prefix header for the common API.
A lot of Carbon applications,
for example, would start by including
the Carbon.h header.
Similarly, Cocoa apps may start
by including Cocoa.h.
So if you put this in a prefix header,
precompile the prefix header,
you can get really fast turnaround.
Keep in mind the prefix header gets
included for all files in the target.
So if you have C++ and C files,
it needs to be compatible with both.
This is easy to do with the #ifdef.
We'll see that in the demo.
And also keep in mind to only put
headers that change relatively
infrequently into the PCH because,
of course, if they change,
then the precompiled header
will need to be recompiled.
Now, Xcode knows about all the
dependencies and the inclusions,
so it will automatically recompile
the prefix header for you,
but that still takes extra time.
So you wouldn't want to put anything
in there that changes a lot.
Distributed builds is another new
feature that we're really excited about.
Xcode can take advantage of
multiple processors in your machine,
of course,
but your neighbor in the cubicle next
to you has that G5 sitting there,
and he's surfing the web, and yeah,
you really want to
compile on that machine,
actually.
So what you can do is you
can take advantage of,
in effect,
instead of a two-processor system,
you can have an end-processor system,
right,
where end is the sum of all the CPUs
and all the different machines that
you choose for distributed builds.
So it can be distributed
to other machines,
and there's two modes.
There's what we call sort
of the free love mode,
which is where it uses
rendezvous to just see,
oh, is there anybody out there who
has said that they want to be
a distributed build server?
And if so, okay, well, we'll send it.
We'll send them our files, right?
But for a more controlled environment,
you may want to just
specify a list of servers,
for example,
the ones that are known to be
in your team's department in
a lab somewhere or something.
And a note about this is it does
require GCC 3.3 and Xcode targets.
So here's another reason to upgrade
to upgrade an imported project
builder target to be an Xcode target.
Zero Link is another feature
designed to save you time.
We found that link time is a
significant part of the turnaround time.
And not so much for a full build,
but when you do the
edit debug build cycle,
you spend a lot of time watching
it say linking this and that.
So Zero Link takes advantage of the
fact that typically when you make edits,
you edit, let's say you have 100 files,
you edit a couple of them,
and then you want to link again.
Well, then it has to read all
those files back in,
generate the binary, et cetera.
So what we've rather do is just
leave those other 98 files alone,
just load them off of the disk when
the application starts running.
So again, it eliminates the link
step by running directly.
And this is on by default in
the development build style.
So while you're doing
day-to-day development,
you get Zero Link by
default for a native target.
The deployment build, of course,
you get a real binary because you don't
want to actually ship your object files.
With Fix and Continue,
this is another feature
that's mostly automatic.
It lets you fix things
while you're debugging.
And as we've seen in some
of the previous demos,
you don't even have to
stop at a breakpoint.
And for simple logic errors,
this can be a real time saver.
It's enabled by default.
You can turn this one
off too if you want.
There's no real reason to turn it off,
but we want to give you lots
of control over these things.
And with that nifty search
field now in the inspector,
there's no real reason not to.
This is great for localized changes.
You don't want to change
things that have global effect,
like the size of a struct,
but logic errors, off by one errors,
that kind of thing works great.
So I'm going to ask Scott Tooker
to come up on stage and
demo some of these things.
What I'm going to go through today is,
we've already gone through
this in previous sessions,
but we want to take another pass
through the target settings and
give you kind of a deeper feel
for how to set up your target,
both just the settings you want
to set and also some tips and
tricks for the precompiled headers,
how to set that up properly.
We'll also look a little bit at the
build styles and at build feedback,
a little bit more in depth on that.
So let me bring up my project.
So the first thing I want to do
is just point out that the way
it works is that we just bring
up the inspector on the target,
and there are four
parts to this inspector.
There's this general tab where you have
your name of the target and the product,
and notice that the name of the target
can be different than the product,
and also the target dependencies.
This target doesn't
have any at this point.
There's the build tab,
which I'll get back to
later in just a bit,
and this is kind of the meat.
This is where all the settings go.
There's also the rules that
was talked about earlier.
This is where you can set
for a given type of file,
you know, what do you want to use.
And as pointed out,
you can also create your own,
and you can reorder them how you like.
And then finally there's the properties.
So for those applications that are,
for those targets that produce bundles
like applications and frameworks,
here's where you can set stuff that
would normally go in your info key list,
like your bundle identifier, an icon,
or document types in the
case of an application.
And just note that we also do support,
for example,
opening up the Info.plist as a
file so you can directly edit it.
But let me jump back here to build.
And as I said,
this is the meat of the target inspector.
This is where all your settings are.
So you'll notice here we're
looking at the common settings.
These are settings we
expect you to change often.
There are things like, okay,
I want to enable C++ exceptions,
or I want,
maybe I have a style of library
or my header search paths.
But there's much more than this.
Let me just open this up.
We actually have several groups here.
Many are static,
but there's actually one dynamic
group that I'll get to in a second.
So you'll notice here we have kind
of our standard build settings.
These are settings that aren't
bound to a given compiler
like GCC or a tool like Res.
They may apply to multiple tools,
or they may just be something
that's specific to Xcode itself.
We also have GCC settings,
and we have some resource
manager settings.
And then for these groups,
we also provide some subdivisions.
And as you can see,
we also show the subdivisions
in some cases by different
icons next to the warnings,
next to the settings.
Let's talk a little bit more
about the actual UI itself.
So let me go back to the common settings.
And you'll notice here what we provide.
If I select one of these guys,
we actually provide descriptions.
Because one thing we noticed when
we looked at environments is that,
especially when dealing
with things like GCC,
but also other environments,
sometimes the settings
can be very cryptic.
And you as a developer may not
know or really need to know
what all these things mean.
And so we wanted to provide
descriptions to make it easy for you
to get a little bit of background on,
OK, if I check this on,
what is it going to do to my code?
Also, as you can see,
especially if I go to, for example,
the GCC settings,
there are quite a number of them.
And so we wanted to provide a
quick way that you could get
to just the settings you want,
even if you didn't know
exactly what it was called.
So, for example,
if I want to find out about, let's say,
prefix files, I can say prefix.
Now, it's interesting.
You'll notice here, okay,
this has prefix, this has prefix,
but effective C++ violations,
what's going on there?
Well, if I click on it,
and if you go through here,
what you'll find out is it's
actually referencing the
prefix in the description.
So, this isn't the best example,
but another example is, for example,
if I wanted to do something with type ID,
which has to do with RTTI.
It actually picks it up right here.
So this way you don't have to
know exactly what it's called,
you just have to kind of
know what you're looking for.
So we hope that this will make it a
lot--we believe this will make it a
lot easier for people when they need
to set those types of target settings.
The one last thing I want to talk
about was this current settings.
You'll notice that it has the
same kind of icon as some of
our smart groups over here have,
because it's actually a smart group.
What the current settings
contains-- let me get rid of that.
What you see is all those settings
that you've set on your target that
are different from the defaults.
So it's kind of like a very
convenient filter because if you
went to go back and look at common
settings or the GCC settings,
you'd see a bunch of things.
But some of these may be things you've
never touched and never want to touch.
These are the actual settings that
you have changed from the defaults.
So it gives you a quick look to see,
okay, what's different about my
target from what a default
stock target would give me.
So at this point,
I'm going to close this.
And I want to talk a little
bit about build styles,
which was talked about earlier.
One of the problems we're trying
to solve with build styles is
that you want to be able to just
override one thing in your target.
And we've seen some environments
where you'll have to have three
different targets that all
build the same exact thing,
except maybe they have a
different optimization style.
So what we've implemented
are these build styles.
And we have two by
default in every project.
One is the development style,
and one is the deployment style.
And so you can see here it's the
same UI as the target editor.
And I'm not going to go into that,
but one small thing I wanted to
mention was sometimes you want
to add your own custom flag build
settings for whatever reason.
You may need to reference
them in a script,
for example.
And this is very easily done by just
clicking this little plus button.
I can just type, you know,
my build setting.
And then you can put in the value.
And just as easily,
if you want to get rid of something,
you just go down here
and hit the minus button.
It goes away.
And then one final thing is in
this project inspector where
we have the build styles,
we also allow you to indicate for a given
project you may want to build it into a
separate location like we're doing here.
This provides some cleanliness,
but also it can leverage
our build system.
If you build a lot of projects
into a common location,
we can actually do some stuff
to use those things together.
So let me close that.
So now let's talk just a
second about the prefix file.
So it was mentioned earlier you
can create these precompiled
prefix header files.
Well,
the way this works is if I go to the
build-- let me search for prefix.
We have two settings.
One is the prefix header.
And you'll notice here it's qt._prefix.h.
And we just check on the
precompile prefix header.
And to show you what a common
prefix header looks like,
let's go over here.
This is my Qt prefix.h.
You'll notice that this is fairly simple.
Remember that because your prefix is
implicitly included before every file,
you do need to be careful because,
for example,
these are all C++ files that are being
-- these are all headers with C++
that are being implicitly included.
But if I was to include this, say,
from a C file,
I don't want these headers to
be implicitly included because
it could cause problems.
So remember to use these guards here,
this ifdef, C++, ifdefc.
But it does provide a lot of
flexibility because you can then have
different sets of headers that get
included for different types of files.
Now finally, let's go ahead.
I'm going to build and run
this to just talk a little
bit about our build feedback.
Well, yeah.
Well, one,
our single file builds are really fast.
Two, you saw there for just a second
it said the build failed.
Well, one thing I can do is we have
this detailed build window
where I can go and I can say,
"Oh, look.
I had errors while
compiling this file here.
I have two warnings and
I have a series of errors."
And that's one place I can go.
But there's actually places that are
even more common you can look at.
We actually have this errors and warnings
smart group that if I click it pops
up with a window that at the top has
a list of all the errors and warnings.
And then even just with the
keyboard I can go through this
list and it'll jump me around to
the various errors and warnings.
And if I want this in a separate window,
all I need to do is double
click the errors and warnings.
And there you go.
There's a separate window.
I can just track it over there.
And then finally, in a given file,
let me go to, for example,
this warning right here.
You'll notice right here we have
the warnings and the errors in line.
And if you actually click on them,
we'll show you in the status bar, okay,
this is what the warning said.
So in this case,
they're relatively easy to fix.
Turns out I forgot a semicolon
and mislabeled something.
And then you can just go on your way.
Back to you, Anders.
ANDRES BORUCH: OK.
Thanks, Scott.
All right,
so that was just showing you where to
actually set some of these flags that
we talked about in the slides earlier.
So I'm going to switch
gears a little bit,
talk about building for
multiple OS releases.
So you now have the nice
Panther Preview CD in your bag.
Well,
you also have the shipping Jaguar OS,
and you may want to deploy for 10.1 also.
So Xcode lets you build
for multiple OS releases,
but still be booted off of one release.
This also saves you time, of course,
because you don't have to set
up multiple partitions and
install on multiple partitions,
and then rerun.
So a typical example is you might want
to run the Jaguar version of Xcode,
but then you actually
use the Panther APIs,
Panther Preview APIs.
Each target can individually specify
the minimum and the maximum OS.
And the minimum version of the
OS is the minimum that you require
your customers to have to run it.
So features on that version
will be assumed to be available.
Now, the maximum version specifies
the version for which you want
to take advantage of features.
So let's say your minimum is Jaguar,
your maximum is Panther.
You want to be able to take
advantage of Panther features,
but you want to do so in a fail-safe way.
So if the feature is not available,
you just don't call it.
So, and the Xcode Developer Preview
supports 10.1.5.
It has SDKs for 10.1.5, 10.2.6,
and for the Panther Preview.
And this is the developer
CD for both Jaguar and Panther.
The APIs for each OS release
are packaged in an SDK.
So what does one of these SDKs contain?
Well, it's a folder that just has
the headers and stub libraries
for that version of the OS.
So you actually get the same
headers as you would on an
install with developer packages.
SDKs can be added independently
and removed independently.
They can be rather large since they
contain all the headers and the stub
libraries for a particular version.
So you can add them after the
fact or you can remove them if
you decide that you don't need,
for example, 10.1.
And one of the things that happens
when you set the minimum and maximum
OS version you want to target
is that special macros are set.
These are documented in more
detail in the help pages,
but you can then use the
macros in your code to check
which functions are available,
which functionality.
You can use them at runtime to check
whether a particular function pointer
is nil and then just not call that.
So this way you can take
advantage of new features and
still support older releases.
Another thing Xcode has is what's
called source tree support.
You may have external sources such
as Power Plant or the QT frameworks
or other large source bases that
are not part of your project,
but they're installed someplace
on your machine that someplace may
be different for each developer.
So what each developer can do is to
set up just a single source tree to
point to a place on disk and say,
okay, here's where my QT sources live,
here's where my Power Plant sources live,
and then the project can just reference
that and access them that way.
The source tree can refer to
the source base using either
relative or absolute paths.
So you can nest projects inside
of folders that group the
source trees and the projects.
Or you could put the source base.
an absolute place on disk.
This feature is used by the
Code Warrior importer when it
imports a project that uses,
for example, Power Plant.
It will actually find Power Plant on your
disk and set up a source tree to that.
So, you don't have to copy the sources
in or carry those along or anything.
So we talked a little bit about
build and about how to configure
your project to take advantage of
some of the speed improvements there,
such as setting up a prefix header,
precompiled prefix header.
We talked a little bit
about the OS support.
We also have some workflow and
automation features that you might
not be aware of and that you probably
haven't seen in any demos so far.
So some of the stuff we've
shown so far has been talked
about in previous sessions,
but the second half here
are some kind of pearls that
haven't been talked about yet.
Source code management,
we've been mentioned a little
bit in previous sessions.
Xcode is tightly integrated
with the SCM support.
So we have built-in support
for CVS and Perforce.
And it's not just a menu that
you pull down and you can
access all the features there.
We actually show the information
about the SCM state in
line along with the files.
It's a lot more integrated.
And we support the day-to-day
operations such as adding,
removing files, changing files,
updating files, that kind of stuff.
You can also compare.
You can look at the history.
You can open the inspector on a
particular file and you can see
the source code management history.
You can see who checked in, what changes,
and when.
And you can actually select two
revisions and compare them graphically
in a tool called File Merge.
Some of the other things we
leave to external repository
management systems are creating new
repository and things like that.
We also have very good
documentation access.
That's also part of
productivity and speed,
is getting quick access
to your documentation.
And you look at this function with
five arguments and you need the
details of that really quickly.
We have API look up,
which searches as you type.
You may have seen in previous
demos and probably see soon again
maybe how we can quickly narrow
down a large list of symbols of
documentation pages for the APIs.
Mac OS X, as you know,
has a very rich set of APIs.
In fact, there are multiple sets of APIs,
Cocoa, Carbon, et cetera.
So you can focus on any one
of those or more than one,
or you can search through them all and
quickly look for what you want to find.
The full text search is better for things
like the conceptual documentation where
you may have a phrase or a concept,
in mind, and you may just try out a
couple of phrases until you
get the hits that you want.
So what's available in this area?
First of all,
there's help for Xcode itself.
That's available from the Help menu,
as we'll show in a minute.
We also have access to the
full documentation for Carbon,
Cocoa, I/O Kit, et cetera,
all the reference documentation.
If you need information about a
specific method or function or class,
it's just a couple of mouse clicks away.
Sun's Java documentation
is also available.
The Mac OS X man pages are available.
We're based on BSD,
and all those man pages are
available right there in Xcode.
Another aspect is
scripting and automation.
So you access the documentation and
you can certainly do that through,
let's say, man on the command line.
You could do that through the
built-in documentation support.
You could also use scripts to set up
custom queries or that kind of thing.
There are several levels
of automation here.
Xcode itself is scriptable.
Project Builder was not.
That was the previous IDE.
Xcode is actually scriptable
from the ground up.
There is a command line build
tool also so that you can use
that in your nightly builds.
Let's say if you have a batch
build that occurs every night that
pulls 15 projects together and
builds them with special options,
you could do that.
The command line build tool is
actually linked against the same
framework that the Xcode is.
It's called Xcode IDE users so
it has exactly the same code
paths for building and all that.
It has access to the entire build system.
There is a user scripts menu which is,
this was an MPW feature that was
requested and it's been added.
You can add custom menu items
tied to your own scripts.
And we also have MPW inspired
worksheet functionality.
So we'll talk a little
bit more about these.
The scriptability, as I mentioned before,
you can actually have access to Xcode's
object model through Apple script.
You can change target
settings and multiple targets,
add files to targets, add to projects,
those kinds of things.
You can also start and stop builds
using Apple script if you want.
There are still, I should say,
there are still a couple of
things that are not supported.
Some of the details, for example,
not every property of every object,
but we're working on adding that
because we want Apple's scriptability
to be a very full-featured way of
accessing Xcode's functionality.
Another way to automate things is
to build from the command line.
So you may have a build that
starts at 2:00 AM at night.
There's a tool called pbbuild.
This is kind of for historical reasons to
provide compatibility with some scripts.
It provides access to the IDE,
and as I mentioned,
it uses the exact same build
system as the IDE does.
So you have access to
all the same features.
[Transcript missing]
This ties in a little bit to the
worksheet functionality we have.
This is another NPW-inspired feature.
As Ted mentioned in the
overview for Developer Tools,
there's a great legacy
of Developer Tools here.
We wanted to make sure we brought
forward some of the pearls that people
have really liked in previous IDEs.
So Xcode has NPW style
worksheet functionality.
And what this means is
you have a text file.
You can select one or more commands
and just execute them as if you
typed them in a terminal or a shell.
And one of the nice ways to use this
is that you can save frequently used
snippets of shell code or even Perl
code or Apple script just in a text file
and then run it whenever you need to.
It also is nice because unlike terminal,
it preserves the history independently.
So you can come back to a
command and its output that
you ran maybe half a year ago,
right?
And you can see what the output was
and you can compare things that way.
We'll see some of this in the demo.
And again, the results here are pasted
back into the text buffer.
So it's an iterative
worksheet experience.
So to help demo some of these features,
I'm going to ask Matt Morse
to come up on stage.
Well, as Anders has pointed out,
there's a wealth of
documentation on the system.
There are over 500 books of various
scope from small topics all the way
up to the human interface guidelines.
And besides that,
there's over 75,000 bits of
reference documentation for
the APIs that are available in
the libraries on your system.
So this is a great
wealth of documentation.
The challenge is to get to the piece
of documentation that you need quickly.
So I'd like to show you some of
the ways you can do that in Xcode.
Xcode has a documentation window.
Well, first there's help available
through Xcode help.
And the documentation window is
available also from the help menu.
So you bring up the documentation window.
It has a look very much like the project
window with your groups over here.
In this case, the groups are sections
of the documentation,
the entire installed library
and subsections that focus
on particular technologies.
As you see, as I'm selecting the
different subsections,
the technology home page
appears in the content area.
And from there you can burrow in
and find the documentation you want
if you want to browse in that way.
A navigation note that I think
you should know is you can command
click any link to bring up the
documentation in a separate window,
and you can option click to
bring it up in your browser.
OK, so that's one way to navigate through
the documentation if you're browsing.
Up here, you've seen this area updating
as I was clicking as well.
This is the results of a
search for the API symbols that
So, to focus on a particular symbol,
just start typing its name and you
quickly go from the entire universe of
75,000 available symbols down to the
few that match what you're looking for.
And in this case,
let's say you were looking
for the groups method.
and clicking that brings
it up in the content area.
Another navigation note is take
a look at the symbol pop-up.
It's just like in the code editor.
You can easily get around the
documentation for a class using this.
OK.
I think I should mention this was
shown in the overview session as well,
but you can turn off
any of these columns,
titles that you don't find useful.
and customized it for the way
you like to get around it.
OK, so that's the API search mechanism.
You can also do a full text search,
as you could in Project Builder,
on any of the sections here that
you have selected in your library.
So that's the documentation window,
but often the quickest way
to the answer you want is
directly from your code editor.
So let's take a look at a project.
Bringing up some source code here.
Getting down to something interesting.
You can,
if you want to look up the documentation
for a specific symbol or class method,
just option click it.
And if there are multiple destinations,
as you see,
you get a menu to select from.
If you wanted to see the
documentation for NSString,
just pick that.
Likewise,
you can control click to bring up
the full text search feature to
search for anything that you want.
OK, so the code editors nicely link
to the documentation access.
Another way you can get to documentation
is through the class browser.
If you're doing
object-oriented programming,
you'll probably find the
class browser very useful.
You can get to the header documentation,
or the header declarations,
but also the blue books give you
access to the documentation for the
selected class or method of that class.
So make use of that.
Another way you can get around is,
or another type of documentation
you can access is the man pages,
the Unix manual pages,
either by name or searching.
So for example,
For example, there it is.
And the man pages are all linked,
hyperlinked,
so you can go to related man pages.
This one I didn't see.
The link for.
Okay, so that's a good way to access,
those are a number of good ways
to access the local documentation,
the documentation that's
installed on your system.
If you want to extend your
search a little further,
the user scripts menu that
Anders mentioned can help you there.
For example, select,
make a selection in your code editor and
You can then search the developer
website at Apple for that selection.
send it out to the internet
and do a Google search.
OK, so those are some of the fast ways to
get around the documentation and find
answers to the questions you have.
Let me take a little closer
look at the user scripts menu.
User scripts are scripts that
extend the command set of Xcode
with commands that you decide,
you create.
Xcode comes with a number of
pre-built commands and here they are.
Let me show you how some of these work.
A very useful one I find is this
uncomment comment selection and you
see as it was pointed out earlier
that there's a key equivalent for it.
So if you need to take some piece
of your code out of service,
you can do it as easily as that.
OK, another comment type that
I find very useful is this--
comment with a prefix
with exclamation points.
If you need to come
back to something later,
you can--
Mark it in that way,
and with a consistent prefix you can
easily get back to that sort of comment.
OK, if you're doing
object-oriented programming,
you might find that you're
doing a lot of typing,
creating accessor methods
for your instance variables.
Here, too, user scripts can help you out.
For example,
let's make an accessor method
for that instance variable.
So I've put the declaration
on the clipboard,
and now I can just paste it in.
And likewise,
there's a similar command for
pasting in the definition.
Okay, there's sort commands,
and one last thing I'd like to show
you with the user scripts menu is
the suite of HeaderDoc commands.
These commands let you put structured
comments in your headers that later can
be generated into HTML documentation.
It's much like Java doc, but it's for C,
C++, and Objective C.
So let's see how that works.
For example,
let's say we want to document this class.
We can insert a class template comment.
Take the class name up there.
And here's where you'd write
your abstract and description.
And here's a method that we'll document.
I don't know exactly what it does,
but we can at least put
in a skeletal comment.
And you see that in this case
the user script is smart enough
to parse the declaration and
pull out the parameters here.
Okay, if we save that and view
HeaderDoc for this header,
Xcode will invoke the HeaderDoc tool,
generate the HTML, and create some
documentation for our class.
So I encourage you to give that a try.
OK, so that's user scripts.
The related feature of worksheets
I'd like to show right now.
Worksheets are kind of a less formal
way of adding commands to Xcode.
And as was pointed out,
it's a good way to keep a history
of commands that you find useful,
that are difficult to retype,
or easily forgotten.
So here's just a simple command.
Hit Control-R.
Select it, hit Control-R,
and it's executed in that text buffer.
And that's the output.
So we just did a listing,
Unix listing of the root directory.
This command is used to invoke
an application in a way to see if
it's doing any redundant drawing.
Those command line switches
are good to remember.
One way to do it is to
leave it in your worksheet.
Let's see what that looks like.
I'm invoking TextEdit.
with those special flags that show
where the drawing is happening.
And this makes it easy to see if
any excess drawing is going on.
Thank you.
All right.
This is a command that lets you
know what symbols you're importing
from a particular library.
In this case,
we're going to look at TextEdit
and see what it's pulling
in from the Cocoa library.
So Command-R, Control-R,
and there you have it.
And I'd like to show you just one more.
As we look through this list of commands,
you see some are in Perl,
some are invoking Apple scripts,
some were Unix commands.
Here's one that, as a genetic engineer,
you might want to use if you've
misplaced a patch of DNA and
you need a little bit more.
So there you go.
Those are the features of worksheets,
user scripts, and documentation access.
Thank you.
MATT MORELL: Thanks, Matt.
All right, so as you see,
you can really go to town and
customize this and just pretty much
set up any kind of workflow you
want and bind it to a key command.
So I just want to wrap up some
of the things we talked about.
We want to leave a fairly
long Q&A session here today,
because this is a
fairly detailed session.
Some of the things we touched on are
Xcode has a lot of productivity features,
right?
Some of them, we tried to make many of
them work automatically,
and a lot of them work
pretty well automatically.
We're still a developer preview,
so by GM we want to get them to
work a lot better automatically.
There's still room for improvement
in terms of your fine tuning.
Things like fix and continue,
we can work on making that even better.
Other things you really
need to customize,
like the scriptability here.
We provide you with a
lot of sample scripts.
All those scripts under the user
menu come as sample scripts,
but of course you can add
or modify any of them.
This HeaderDoc knowledge, for example,
is not built into Xcode in any way.
That's just in the script.
So you could really
add whatever you want.
Precomputing.
We've got a lot of
different compiled headers.
We talked a little bit
about how to set those up.
There's a lot more
information in the help pages.
Xcode gives you the power and the
flexibility here to really customize
your workflow the way you want to.
So how to learn more about this?
Well, we're not going to ask you to go
out on the web and read about this,
right?
We have built-in help pages.
So as we just saw,
you can use the documentation
search features not just
for the API documentation,
but also for help about
Xcode functionality itself.
There are, of course,
the Inside Mac OS X books,
especially the System Overview
book that talks more about some of
the concepts that underlie this.
The IDE, of course,
supports the platform initiatives,
things like frameworks,
things like that kind of concept.
And those IDE-independent things are
documented in the System Overview.
Xcode knows how to build them,
but the best documentation
is in the System Overview.
Of course,
the developer connection tools pages,
and the CVS documentation,
and the Perforce documentation
are available on the web.
Who to contact for more information?
Guy Fugigiorgi,
Technology Manager for Development Tools.
I'm actually going to invite
him up on the stage now for Q&A.
And here are also some other URLs.
There are a couple more sessions
you may want to check out.